Good day i'm norman Wildberger and today we're
going to discuss Euclid's elements the most
important mathematics book of all time written
by Euclid in 300 BC it represents a summary of
everything that the ancient Greeks had discovered
about geometry in the 300 years before that Euclid
starts with some definitions these definitions
aren't too clear to someone who doesn't already
understand what the word terms roughly mean but
they do make more precise what Euclid has in
mind so he says that a point is that which has no
part so a point is not supposed to have any finite
width a line is breathless length the extremities
of a line are points that means he wants to
consider a line as being up what we would call a
line segment with a beginning and an end and many
other definitions including perpendicular lines
circles up to parallel lines which are defined
by the property that they do not meet if they are
extended after the definitions come some axioms so
there are five sort of simple rules logical rules
that are valid in rather large context for example
things which are equal to the same thing are also
equal to one another he's saying that if a equals
B and a will C then B equals C and for example
the whole is greater than the part what comes
next is a little bit more crucial for geometry
the postulates Euclid's idea of how to arrange
his geometry was to start with simple things and
then weren't graduates more complicated things
but he had to start somewhere and he decided that
there were certain fundamental facts that he was
going to assume because they were just obvious to
anybody he called these postulates there are five
of them here what they are the first one is that
if you have any two points you can always draw a
line between them the second one is that if you
have a light you're always allowed to extend it
in either direction as far as you want the third
if you have two points then you can always draw
a circle whose Center is one of the points going
through the other point of course the Greeks use
the compass for that the fourth postulate concerns
right angles so right angle is the configuration
made by two perpendicular lines we usually use
that symbol for perpendicular lines so there
are two right angles and the postulate is that
any two right angles are the same and what is
you could mean by that he means that if you pick
this up you can superimpose it on the other one
generally when Euclid says two things are the
same that's what he means he means you can pick
one up and impose it on top of the other one
and then the fifth postulate by far the most
contentious one the one that developed a lot
more job two coming from it later on is the
parallel postulate which says that if you have
a line at a point not on the line then there's
exactly one line that you can draw through that
point which is parallel to the given line so after
this introductory material Euclid starts with
the books there are 13 books or we might call
them chapters and they deal with various issues
most of the books are with geometry there are a
few that concern number theory let's have a look
at some of the content within a special focus on
those things that are important for logical set
up of foundations so the first proposition is a
construction of an equilateral triangle on a given
base so I suppose you've given that line there you
want to construct an equilateral triangle on it
well my Euclid says is that you stop put your
compass there and draw a circle through that
point that's using the puck possible and then
another at a circle centered here through the
other point then these two circles meeting here
give us an equilateral fry and already with this
first proposition we have an example of a place
where you kid cheats a little bit because he does
not have a postulate that guarantees that these
two circles necessarily meet it's obvious from
the picture that they do but it's not actually
logically a consequence of what he's set up
already that's going to be a recurring theme
in Euclid that if you look carefully there are
assumptions built in aside for the West Indies
are already formally acknowledged there are
many other propositions the last two in this
book are concerning the most fundamental theorem
in mathematics out of Pythagoras and it's very
important to understand how you have thought about
Pythagoras so here's a right triangle meaning that
these two sides are perpendicular Pythagoras is a
statement about three areas areas of squares built
on these three sides so we call these three areas
q1 q2 and q3 the ancient Greeks used like the word
quadrature and Pythagoras theorem says that in
such a situation this area q1 plus this area q2
equals this area q3 and the other proposition 48
is the converse that if this relation holds then
is a right triangle book two who deals with what
we would call geometrical algebra with algebraic
relations like this which in Euclid's time were
expressed geometrically so a plus B all squared
equals a squared plus B squared plus 2a B was
represented by a geometrical figure like this
proposition 14 shows how to solve a quadratic
equation or find a square root if you have a
rectangle with sides a and B the problem is to
find a square that has the same area as that
rectangle so we're looking for an x such as x
equals a times B and here's the solution you
extend this a length of B so that this is equal
to this and you draw a circle with this as the
diameter and from here you go up perpendicularly
to where you meet the circle again we assume
that we actually do meet the circle and then this
distance here is the one that we want book three
deals with circles there are famous theorems
for example here is a circle there's a chord
on the circle and here's the angle subtended by
that chord at the center and here is the angle
subtended by that same chord at a point on the
circumference by angle the ancient Greeks did
not mean what we mean in terms of 37 degrees or 54
degrees they meant rather just the configuration
consisting of the two lines or two rays so that
was an angle there's a geometrical configuration
so when Euclid says that this angle is twice
this angle what he means is that you can split
this angle up into two pieces both of which are
congruent to this one there's no actual physical
measurement system taking place here by the way
this theorem is not exactly true all the time if
this point here is on this side and it's no longer
true and so Euclid has to separate these two cases
another interesting phenomenon having to do with
angles that the ancient Greeks worry about is
this idea of a horned angle if you have a tangent
to a circle at a point like that then you could
knew that you couldn't fit any other line in this
little green area between the circle and the line
but nevertheless this kind of curved angle which
they call a horned angle has some claim to being
nonzero so the Greeks were a little bit ambiguous
or confused about how to treat angles like this
next time we're going to look at book 5 book 4 is
just inscribed polygons but book 5 is particularly
interesting for foundational issues having to
do with irrational numbers it deals with your
DOCSIS theory of proportion so I hope you're
going to join me for that i'm norman Wildberger